---
title: What is a quasicrystal?
tags: math
mathjax: On
thumbnail: /up/quasi-thumb.png
googlepost: 101956452641381748248/posts/AVJTrqRM9a3
---

This post was originally a talk given in [Pizza Seminar][PizzaSeminar]
on October 15, 2014. Most of the mathematical content is from
Wikipedia and [this paper by Niizeki][Niizeki].
 
## Abstract
The crystallographic restriction theorem
says a finite-order automorphism of \\(\\mathbb{Z}^3\\)
(in chemistry language, a symmetry of a crystal)
has order 1, 2, 3, 4, or 6.
But \\(\\mathbb{Z}^3\\) is small potatoes; so let's go to \\(\\mathbb{Z}^n\\),
do some Galois theory in cyclotomic fields,
and get us some icosahedral symmetry!
(Icosahedrite is a real thing, say serious scientists.)
Pretty pictures will be provided, including demonstrations of self-similarity.
Self-similarity is always cool, right?
{:itemprop="description"}

[PizzaSeminar]: http://math.uchicago.edu/~pizzaseminar/
[Niizeki]: http://iopscience.iop.org/0305-4470/22/2/009

## Contents
1. Contents
{:toc}

<!-- TODO: style this TOC -->

## The crystallographic restriction theorem

A crystal is a regular grid (like \\(\\mathbb{Z}^3\\)) of atoms.
There is a remarkable theorem about what symmetries a crystal can admit:

Theorem (crystallographic restriction theorem)
: If \\(A \\in \\operatorname{Aut} \\mathbb{Z}^3\\) has finite order,
  then the order is 1, 2, 3, 4, or 6.

Proof
: Properties of \\(A\\) imply properties of its eigenvalues:

  \\(A\\) | eigenvalues
  --------|------------
  finite order | on the unit circle \\(S^1\\)
  real | in complex conjugate pairs (so one is \\(\\pm 1\\))
  integer | their sum, \\(\\operatorname{tr} A\\), is an integer

  So if \\(e^{i\\theta}\\) is an eigenvalue of \\(A\\), then
  \\[ \operatorname{tr} A = e^{i\\theta} + e^{-i\\theta} \\pm 1 = 2 \\cos \\theta \\pm 1. \\]
  Therefore \\(\\cos \\theta \\in \\frac{1}{2} \\mathbb{Z}\\).
  The eigenvalues \\(e^{i\\theta}\\) satisfying this
  are of order 1, 2, 3, 4, and 6.

  {% include figure.html alt="Eigenvalues on the unit circle with half-integer real part" src="half-integers.png" imgextra="class=\"grayscale-invertible\"" %}


## X-ray crystallography: peeking inside real crystals

### Setup

Here's how scientists figure out the internal structure of a crystal.
To start, shine an x-ray on it and record the scattered radiation on film.
For our purposes, an x-ray is a function \\(f\\) satisfying
	\\[ f(x+?) = e^{i k \\cdot x} f(?) \\]
for some vector \\(k\\) that depends on the ray direction and wavelength.
This lets us calculate the factors by which \\(f\\) changes
from source \\(x\_1\\) to atom \\(x\\) and from atom to film \\(x\_2\\).

{% include figure.html alt="X-rays bouncing off an atom" src="scattering.png" imgextra="class=\"grayscale-invertible\"" %}

The total change in \\(f\\) is by a factor of
\\( e^{i[(k\_1 - k\_2) \\cdot x - k\_1 \\cdot x\_1 + k\_2 \\cdot x\_2]} . \\)
Integrating this over all atom positions \\(x\\) in the crystal
yields the total radiation bounced in the direction of \\(k\_2\\).
So...

Upshot
: The photo records (part of)
  the Fourier transform of the distribution of atoms.[^phaseRecovery]

[^phaseRecovery]: The photo loses phase information, the recovery of which
    is [a nontrivial problem][PhaseRecovery].

[PhaseRecovery]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phase_problem

### A troublesome photo

Since rotational symmetries of a lattice are inherited by
its Fourier transform, photos like the one below
would seem to violate the crystallographic restriction theorem.

{% capture byline %}Materialscientist <a href="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Zn-Mg-HoDiffraction.JPG">on Wikimedia Commons</a> (CC-BY-SA-3.0){% endcapture %}
{% include figure.html alt="X-ray photo with order 10 symmetry" src="diffraction.jpg" by=byline %}

### Demo: Making waves

To get a picture of what kind of crystal we're looking at,
let's approximate the inverse transform by adding waves at
\\(n\\) regularly spaced angles. Try it for 5, 8, 12, and 7.

{% include demolink.html thumb="/quasi/thumb-waves.jpg" text="Sums of waves" url="/quasi/waves.html" %}

You can [animate these too][Keegan]; and
Jason Davies has a [WebGL adaptation][JasonDaviesQuasi]
of the animation.

[Keegan]: http://mainisusuallyafunction.blogspot.com/2011/10/quasicrystals-as-sums-of-waves-in-plane.html
[JasonDaviesQuasi]: http://www.jasondavies.com/animated-quasicrystals/

## Slicing higher-dimensional lattices

### The problem: locating atoms

The last demo showed you the graph of
\\(f(x) = \\displaystyle\\sum\_{i=1}^n \\cos (k\_i \\cdot x) \\)
in \\(\\mathbb{R}^2\\) for evenly spaced \\(k\_i\\) on the unit circle.
This is all very nice and smooth,
but we want to actually place atoms---discrete points---in a grid.
Let's put them in the hotspots---i.e. where \\(f\\) hits some threshold.

To turn this into a discrete process, use the following trick:
realize the waves \\(\\cos (k\_i \\cdot x)\\) as 2-D slices of independent
waves in \\(\\mathbb{R}^n\\)---then hotspots are where the slice passes
near lattice points.

### The explicit recipe

Let \\(f\\) be the restriction of the function
  \\[ \\mathbb{R}^n \\ni x \\mapsto \\sum\_{i=1}^n \\cos (e\_i \\cdot x) \\]
to a 2-plane on which the basis vectors \\(e\_i\\) project to \\(k\_i\\).
To choose the 2-plane, let \\(A \\in \\operatorname{GL}\_n \\mathbb{Z}\\)
act by cycling the basis vectors \\(e\_i\\).
Diagonalizing over \\(\\mathbb{C}\\) gets you the matrix
  \\[ \\begin{pmatrix} \\zeta & & & & \\\\ & \\zeta^{-1} & & & \\\\ & & \\zeta^2 & & \\\\ & & & \\zeta^{-2} & \\\\ & & & & \\ddots \\end{pmatrix} \\]
where \\(\\zeta = e^{2 \\pi i / n}\\). Over \\(\\mathbb{R}\\),
the eigenvalues pair into 2&times;2 blocks,
corresponding to 2-planes on which \\(A\\)
acts as rotation by a multiple of \\(\\frac{2\\pi}{n}\\).
Pick any one of them.

Upshot
: * The 2-plane is a 2-dimensional subrepresentation \\(V\\) of
    \\(\\langle A \\rangle \\curvearrowright \\mathbb{R}^n\\).
  * Atoms (hotspots) are
    points of \\(V\\) that lie kinda near points of \\(\\mathbb{Z}^n\\).

### Demo: Atoms in 2-D quasicrystals

With this in hand, a computer can be convinced[^implementation2D]
to find the atoms for you, drawing larger dots for better hotspots.
Try it for several values of \\(n\\); I suggest 5, 7, 8, 6, 2, 12, and 11.

[^implementation2D]: For efficiency reasons, the demo actually uses
    the number-theoretic model from the section after.

{% include demolink.html thumb="/quasi/thumb-2d.png" text="2-D quasicrystals" url="/quasi/2d.html" imgextra="itemprop=\"image\"" %}

Remark
: An alternative method is to slice fundamental domains (\\(n\\)-cubes)
  with the 2-plane, which yields pictures like the Penrose tiling below.
  Jason Davies has [an applet you can play with][JasonDaviesTubingen],
  based on [an older one][GregEganTubingen] by Greg Egan.

{% capture byline %}Inductiveload <a href="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Penrose_Tiling_(Rhombi).svg">on Wikimedia Commons</a> (PD){% endcapture %}
{% include figure.html alt="A Penrose Tiling" src="penrose.png" by=byline %}


[JasonDaviesTubingen]: http://www.jasondavies.com/tuebingen/
[GregEganTubingen]: http://www.gregegan.net/APPLETS/31/31.html

## Self-similarity

At this point, we could go home---we have a description of quasicrystals
from which we can produce both interactive computer renderings and
theorems (like quasicrystals not actually having translational symmetry,
due to \\(V\\) containing no integer points besides 0).

Of course, there is more---the "quasi"-ness of quasicrystals allows a
sort of self-similarity that honest crystals can't have. To see it in
action, go back to [that atoms demo](/quasi/2d.html) and try zooming in or out
for a while.

To explain this self-similarity---the apparent
indistinguishability of different zoom levels---we will need
a bit of number theory.

### A number-theoretic model of quasicrystals

Theorem (crystallographic restriction in arbitrary dimensions)
: \\(\\operatorname{GL}\_m \\mathbb{Z} \\) contains a matrix \\(A\\) which
  has \\(\\zeta\_n = e^{2\\pi i/n}\\) as an eigenvalue
  (so it rotates some 2-plane by \\(\\frac{2 \\pi}{n}\\))
  if and only if \\(m \\geq \\varphi(n)\\), where \\(\\varphi\\) is
  [Euler's totient function][Totient].

[Totient]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euler%27s_totient_function

Proof
: The Galois conjugates of \\(\\zeta\_n\\) must also be eigenvalues
  of \\(A\\).

  * Since \\(\\zeta\_n^n = 1\\), they're \\(n\\)th roots of 1.
  * Since \\(\\zeta\_n\\) generates all \\(n\\)th roots of 1,
    they're primitive---i.e. \\(\\zeta\_n^k\\) where
    \\(k\\) and \\(n\\) are coprime.

  The number of such \\(k\\) is \\(\\varphi(n)\\). To prove that
  \\(\\varphi(n)\\) works, observe that
  \\[ \\mathbb{Z}[\\zeta\_n] \\hookrightarrow \\mathbb{Q}(\\zeta\_n) \\cong\_{\\mathbb{Q}\\text{-vect}} \\mathbb{Q}^{\\varphi(n)} \\subset \\mathbb{R}^{\\varphi(n)} \\]
  as a discrete subgroup, since the [field norms][FieldNorm]
  of the leftmost terms are in \\(\\mathbb{Z}\\).

[FieldNorm]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Field_norm

Remark
: If \\(p\\) and \\(q\\) are large enough primes,
  you can produce an integer matrix \\(A\\) of order \\(pq\\)
  and size \\(\\varphi(p) + \\varphi(q) < \\varphi(pq)\\),
  but it won't rotate any 2-plane by \\(\\frac{2\\pi}{pq}\\).

### A mathematical description of zooming

Here's how we implement[^zoomImplementation] zooming:
scale the 2-plane \\(V\\) by some factor
and the unseen \\(m-2\\) dimensions by some other factor to
preserve \\(m\\)-dimensional volume. That way the total visual density
of dots remains about the same.
Here's how we interpret zooming and self-similarity:

[^zoomImplementation]: Self-similarity is what makes zooming possible
    (i.e. not unbearably slow) in the atoms demo---the atom finder can
    get away with exploring a 2-dimensional slice instead of the
    entire \\(m\\)-dimensional space.

* Zooming acts by scalars on \\(V\\) and the other irreducible
  sub-representations of
  \\(\\langle A \\rangle \\curvearrowright \\mathbb{R}^{\\varphi(n)}\\),
  so zooming is a 1-parameter subgroup \\(\\gamma\\) in
  \\(\\operatorname{SAut}\_A \\mathbb{R}^{\\varphi(n)} \\)
  (volume preserving automorphisms).
* Visually, transforming by anything in
  \\(\\operatorname{Aut} \\mathbb{Z}[\\zeta\_n]\\)
  isn't detectable.
* Self-similarity means that the image of \\(\\gamma\\) in
  \\(\\operatorname{SAut}\_A \\mathbb{R}^{\\varphi(n)} / \\operatorname{Aut} \\mathbb{Z}[\\zeta\_n]\\) accumulates on itself (or is periodic).

The existence of self-similarity rests on one key fact
from number theory.

Theorem (Dirichlet's Unit Theorem)
: Suppose a number field has \\(r\\) embeddings in \\(\\mathbb{R}\\) and
  \\(c\\) embeddings in \\(\\mathbb{C}\\). Then its group of units has rank
  \\[ r + \\frac{c}{2} - 1 . \\]

Corollary
: \\(\\operatorname{SAut}\_A \\mathbb{R}^{\\varphi(n)} / \\operatorname{Aut} \\mathbb{Z}[\\zeta\_n]\\) is compact.

Proof
: Since automorphisms act by scalars on all irreducible subrepresentations,

  \\[\\begin{align\*}
  \\operatorname{Aut}\_A \\mathbb{R}^{\\varphi(n)} &\\cong (\\mathbb{C}^\\times)^{\\frac{\\varphi(n)}{2}} \\cong (\\mathbb{R} \\times S^1)^{\\frac{\\varphi(n)}{2}} \\\\ 
  \\operatorname{SAut}\_A \\mathbb{R}^{\\varphi(n)} &\\cong \\mathbb{R}^{\\frac{\\varphi(n)}{2} - 1} \\times (S^1)^{\\frac{\\varphi(n)}{2}} .
  \\end{align\*}\\]

  Since
  [\\(\\mathbb{Z}[\\zeta\_n] = \\mathcal{O}\_{\\mathbb{Q}(\\zeta\_n)}\\)][RingOfIntegers],
  Dirichlet's Unit Theorem implies that
  \\(\\operatorname{Aut} \\mathbb{Z}[\\zeta\_n]\\) contains a copy of
  \\(\\mathbb{Z}^{\\frac{\\varphi(n)}{2} - 1}\\).
  Then \\(\\operatorname{Aut} \\mathbb{Z}[\\zeta\_n]\\),
  being discrete (it's conjugate to a subgroup of
  \\(\\operatorname{SL}(\\varphi(n), \\mathbb{Z})\\)),
  is cocompact.

Self-similarity now follows, having been reduced to the statement that
a 1-parameter subgroup of a torus is recurrent.

Remark
: The image of \\(\\gamma\\) is periodic when (and only when)
  \\(\\varphi(n) = 2\\)---so when \\(n\\) is 5, 8, 10, or 12.
  This makes the self-similarity exact---i.e. different zoom levels
  can look identical (not just suspiciously similar)---and allows one
  to build games like Richard Schwartz's [Lucy and Lily][LucyLily]
  based on facts like
	  \\[ (2 + \\sqrt{5})(2 - \\sqrt{5}) = -1. \\]

Remark
: Michael Rule's
  [collection of quasicrystals graphics][WeAloneCategory]
  includes an [alternative description of zooming][WeAloneZooming]
  that sidesteps the number theory, instead using
  [Shepard Tones][ShepardTones] to produce self-similarity.

[RingOfIntegers]: http://mathoverflow.net/questions/17289/
[LucyLily]: http://www.math.brown.edu/~res/Java/App12/test1.html
[WeAloneZooming]: http://wealoneonearth.blogspot.com/2011/11/visual-analogue-of-shepard-tone.html
[WeAloneCategory]: http://wealoneonearth.blogspot.com/search/label/quasicrystal
[ShepardTones]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shepard_tone

## 3-D quasicrystals

### The n-dimensional viewpoint

A quasicrystal with irreducible symmetry \\(G\\) is
an irreducible-over-\\(\\mathbb{R}\\) subrepresentation \\(V\\) of
an irreducible-over-\\(\\mathbb{Z}\\) representation
\\(G \\hookrightarrow \\operatorname{SL}(m,\\mathbb{Z})\\).
The atoms are points of \\(\\mathbb{Z}^m\\) near \\(V\\),
and the Galois conjugates of \\(V\\)
(the other subrepresentations over \\(\\mathbb{R}\\))
allow the possibility for self-similarity.

### The search for 3-D quasicrystals

To look for 3-dimensional quasicrystals, one first finds a list of the
[seven irreducible finite subgroups of \\(\\operatorname{SL}(3,\\mathbb{R})\\)][SevenPointGroups].
Most of these preserve an ordinary 3-D lattice---i.e. the representation
can be defined over \\(\\mathbb{Z}\\). The two exceptions are
the two icosahedral groups---the [alternating group][AlternatingGroup]
\\(A\_5\\) and the product \\(A\_5 \\times \\{\\pm 1\\}\\)---so up to
finite index subgroups, [there's only one][TiggerWarning]
irreducible 3-D quasicrystal, which you can explore in the following demo.

{% include demolink.html thumb="/quasi/thumb-3d.png" text="3-D quasicrystals" url="/quasi/3d.html" %}

The standard representation of \\(A\_5\\) has one Galois conjugate,
which can be found in a [list of representations of \\(A\_5\\)][ReprList].
The two representations can be described explicitly as follows:
in the standard representation,
\\(A\_5\\) acts by rotation on the icosahedron with vertices
\\(\\pm(\\sqrt{5}, 0)\\) and \\(\\pm(1, 2\\zeta\_5^k)\\)
in \\(\\mathbb{R} \\times \\mathbb{C}\\).
To obtain the other representation,
merely conjugate the action on the set of vertices by
the permutation induced by \\(\\zeta\_5 \\mapsto \\zeta\_5^2\\).

Oh, and---yes, they're real.

{% capture byline %}AMES Lab., US DoE <a href="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ho-Mg-ZnQuasicrystal.jpg">via Wikimedia Commons</a> (PD){% endcapture %}
{% include figure.html alt="A Ho-Mg-Zn quasicrystal over a millimeter grid" src="homgzn-quasi.jpg" by=byline %}

[SevenPointGroups]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Point_groups_in_three_dimensions#The_seven_remaining_point_groups
[AlternatingGroup]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alternating_group
[ReprList]: http://groupprops.subwiki.org/wiki/Linear_representation_theory_of_alternating_group:A5
[TiggerWarning]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tigger

## Footnotes
